Docs/k8s install update (#72567)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/setup-grafana/installation/kubernetes/index.md

# Deploy Grafana on Kubernetes

> This page explains how to install and run Grafana on Kubernetes (K8s). It uses Kubernetes manifests for the setup. If you prefer Helm, refer to the [Grafana Helm community charts](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On this page, you will find instructions for installing and running Grafana on Kubernetes (K8s) using Kubernetes manifests for the setup. If Helm is your preferred option, refer to [Grafana Helm community charts](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts).
```

## Before you begin

To follow this guide, you need:

- The latest version of [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) running either locally or remotely (on a public or private cloud).

> - To use in a local environment use any Kubernetes such as [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/), [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/), [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/kubernetes/), and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To use it in a local environment, you can use various Kubernetes options such as Minikube (https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/), Kind (https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/), Docker Desktop (https://docs.docker.com/desktop/kubernetes/), and others.
```

> - To use managed cloud services such as [Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine), [Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS)](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/), or [Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/kubernetes-service/) if you are considering using Kubernetes in a production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you plan to use Kubernetes in a production setting, it's recommended to utilize managed cloud services like [Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine), [Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS)](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/), or [Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/kubernetes-service/).
```

## System Requirements

This section provides minimum hardware and software requirements.

### Minimum Hardware Requirements

- Disk Space = 1 GB

> - Memory = 750 MiB (approx 750 MB)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Memory: 750 MiB (approx 750 MB)
```

> - CPU = 250m (approx 2.5 cores)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CPU: 250m (approx 2.5 cores)
```

### Supported databases

For a list of supported databases, refer to [supported databases](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/#supported-databases).

### Supported web browsers

For a list of support web browsers, refer to [supported web browsers](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/#supported-web-browsers).

> > **Note:** Make sure to enable port `3000` in your network environment as this is the Grafana default port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% admonition type="note" %}}
Enable port `3000` in your network environment, as this is the Grafana default port.
{{% /admonition %}}
```

## Deploy Grafana OSS on Kubernetes

> This section explains how to install Grafana OSS using Kubernetes. If you want to install Grafana Enterprise on Kubernetes,  refer to [Deploy Grafana Enterprise on Kubernetes](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/kubernetes/#deploy-grafana-enterprise-on-kubernetes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section explains how to install Grafana OSS using Kubernetes. If you want to install Grafana Enterprise on Kubernetes, refer to [Deploy Grafana Enterprise on Kubernetes](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/kubernetes/#deploy-grafana-enterprise-on-kubernetes).
```

> When you deploy an application in Kubernetes, it will use its default namespace which may have other applications running and can cause conflicts and other issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you deploy an application in Kubernetes, it will use the default namespace which may already have other applications running. This can result in conflicts and other issues.
```

> As best practice, create a new namespace, as Kubernetes does allow users to create namespaces which will allow us to easily manage,  organize, allocate, and manage cluster resources. Refer to the Kubernetes official documentation for more reference about the [Namespaces](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to create a new namespace in Kubernetes to better manage, organize, allocate, and manage cluster resources. For more information about Namespaces, refer to the official Kubernetes documentation at https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/.
```

1. To create a namespace, run the following command:
   
   ```bash
   kubectl create namespace my-grafana
   ```
   In this example, the namespace is `my-grafana`

1. To verify and view the newly created namespace, run the following command:
   
   ```bash
   kubectl get namespace my-grafana
   ```

>    The output of the above command will provide more information about the newly created namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The output of the command provides more information about the newly created namespace.
```

> 1. Create a file called `grafana.yaml`. This file will contain the YAML code aka manifest for deploying Grafana.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a YAML manifest file named `grafana.yaml`. This file will contain the necessary code for deployment.
```

   
   ```bash
   touch grafana.yaml
   ```

    In the next step you define the following three objects in the YAML file.

    | Object | Description |
    | ------ | ------ |
    | Persistent Volume Claim (PVC) | This object stores the data. |
    | Service | This object provides network access to the Pod defined in the deployment. |

>     | Deployment | This object is responsible for creating the pods, ensuring they stay up to date, and  managing Replicaset and Rolling updates. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    | Deployment | This object is responsible for creating the pods, ensuring they stay up to date, and managing Replicaset and Rolling updates. |
```

               failureThreshold: 3
               initialDelaySeconds: 30
               periodSeconds: 10
               successThreshold: 1
               tcpSocket:
                 port: 3000
               timeoutSeconds: 1
             resources:
               requests:
                 cpu: 250m
                 memory: 750Mi
             volumeMounts:
               - mountPath: /var/lib/grafana
                 name: grafana-pv
         volumes:
           - name: grafana-pv
             persistentVolumeClaim:
               claimName: grafana-pvc
   ---
   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Service
   metadata:
     name: grafana
   spec:
     ports:
       - port: 3000
         protocol: TCP
         targetPort: http-grafana
     selector:
       app: grafana
     sessionAffinity: None
     type: LoadBalancer
   ```

1. Run the following command to send the manifest to the Kubernetes API server:
   
   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f grafana.yaml --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

   This command creates the PVC, Deployment, and Service objects.

1. Complete the following steps to verify the deployment status of each object.
   
   a. For PVC, run the following command:
   

>      ```bash
>      kubectl get pvc --namespace=my-grafana -o wide
>      ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      ```bash
      kubectl get pvc --namespace=my-grafana -o wide
      ```
```

>          ```bash
>          kubectl get pvc --namespace=my-grafana -o wide
>          ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ```bash
     kubectl get pvc --namespace=my-grafana -o wide
     ```
```

>    2. For Deployment, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   b. For Deployment, run the following command:
```

             volumeMounts:
               - mountPath: /var/lib/grafana
                 name: grafana-pv
         volumes:
           - name: grafana-pv
             persistentVolumeClaim:
               claimName: grafana-pvc
   ---
   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Service
   metadata:
     name: grafana
   spec:
     ports:
       - port: 3000
         protocol: TCP
         targetPort: http-grafana
     selector:
       app: grafana
     sessionAffinity: None
     type: LoadBalancer
   ```

1. Run the following command to send the manifest to the Kubernetes API server:

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f grafana.yaml --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

   This command creates the PVC, Deployment, and Service objects.

1. Complete the following steps to verify the deployment status of each object.

   a. For PVC, run the following command:

   ```bash
   kubectl get pvc --namespace=my-grafana -o wide
   ```

   b. For Deployment, run the following command:

   ```bash
   kubectl get deployments --namespace=my-grafana -o wide
   ```

   c. For Service, run the following command:

   ```bash
   kubectl get svc --namespace=my-grafana -o wide
   ```

## Access Grafana on Managed K8s Providers

> In this task, you access Grafana deployed on a Managed Kubernetes provider using a web browser. Accessing Grafana via a Web browser is straightforward if it is deployed on a Managed Kubernetes Providers as it uses the cloud provider’s **LoadBalancer** to which the external load balancer routes, are automatically created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this task, you access Grafana deployed on a Managed Kubernetes provider using a web browser. Accessing Grafana via a web browser is straightforward if it is deployed on a Managed Kubernetes Provider as it uses the cloud provider’s **LoadBalancer** to which the external load balancer routes are automatically created.
```

1. Run the following command to obtain the deployment information:

   ```bash
   kubectl get all --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

   The output returned should look similar to the following:

   ```bash
   NAME                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   pod/grafana-69946c9bd6-kwjb6   1/1     Running   0          7m27s

   NAME              TYPE           CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP      PORT(S)          AGE
   service/grafana   LoadBalancer   10.5.243.226   1.120.130.330   3000:31171/TCP   7m27s

   NAME                      READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
   deployment.apps/grafana   1/1     1            1           7m29s

   NAME                                 DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
   replicaset.apps/grafana-69946c9bd6   1         1         1       7m30s
   ```

1. Identify the **EXTERNAL-IP** value in the output and type it into your browser.

>    1. The Grafana sign-in page appears.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The Grafana sign-in page appears.
```

1. To sign in, enter `admin` for both the username and password.

1. If you do not see the EXTERNAL-IP, complete the following steps:

   a. Run the following command to do a port-forwarding of the Grafana service on port `3000`.

   ```bash
   kubectl port-forward service/grafana 3000:3000 --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

   For more information about port-forwarding, refer to [Use Port Forwarding to Access Applications in a Cluster](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/port-forward-access-application-cluster/).

   b. Navigate to `localhost:3000` in your browser.

   The Grafana sign-in page appears.

   c. To sign in, enter `admin` for both the username and password.

## Access Grafana using minikube

There are multiple ways to access the Grafana UI on a web browser when using minikube. For more information about minikube, refer to [How to access applications running within minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/handbook/accessing/).

This section lists the two most common options for accessing an application running in minikube.

> ### Option 1 Expose the Service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Option 1: Expose the service
```

> This option uses the `type: LoadBalancer` in the `grafana.yaml` service manifest, which makes the Service accessible through the `minikube service` command. For more information, refer to [minikube Service command usage](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/commands/service/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option uses the `type: LoadBalancer` in the `grafana.yaml` service manifest, which makes the service accessible through the `minikube service` command. For more information, refer to [minikube Service command usage](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/commands/service/).
```

1. Run the following command to obtain the Grafana service IP:

   ```bash
   minikube service grafana --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

   The output returns the Kubernetes URL for service in your local cluster.

   ```bash
   |------------|---------|-------------|------------------------------|
   | NAMESPACE  |  NAME   | TARGET PORT |             URL              |
   |------------|---------|-------------|------------------------------|
   | my-grafana | grafana |        3000 | http://192.168.122.144:32182 |
   |------------|---------|-------------|------------------------------|

>    🎉  Opening service my-grafana/grafana in default browser...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Opening service my-grafana/grafana in default browser...
```

>    👉  http://192.168.122.144:32182

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   http://192.168.122.144:32182
```

   ```

> 1. Run a curl command to verify whether a given connection should be working in a browser under ideal circumstances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run a curl command to verify whether a given connection should work in a browser under ideal circumstances.
```

   ```bash
   curl 192.168.122.144:32182
   ```

>    The following example output determines that an endpoint has been located:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The following example output shows that an endpoint has been located:
```

# Deploy Grafana on Kubernetes

> On this page, you will find instructions for installing and running Grafana on Kubernetes (K8s) using Kubernetes manifests for the setup. If Helm is your preferred option, refer to [Grafana Helm community charts](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On this page, you will find instructions for installing and running Grafana on Kubernetes using Kubernetes manifests for the setup. If Helm is your preferred option, refer to [Grafana Helm community charts](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts).
```

## Before you begin

To follow this guide:

- You need the latest version of [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) running either locally or remotely on a public or private cloud.

- If you plan to use it in a local environment, you can use various Kubernetes options such as [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/), [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/), [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/kubernetes/), and others.

- If you plan to use Kubernetes in a production setting, it's recommended to utilize managed cloud services like [Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine), [Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS)](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/), or [Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/kubernetes-service/).

## System requirements

This section provides minimum hardware and software requirements.

### Minimum Hardware Requirements

- Disk space: 1 GB
- Memory: 750 MiB (approx 750 MB)

> - CPU: 250m (approx 2.5 cores)

Reviewer: 👍

> - CPU: 250m (approx 2.5 cores)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CPU: 2500m (approx 2.5 cores)
```

> - CPU: 250m (approx 2.5 cores)

Author: Thank you for this @clayton-cornell !!

### Supported databases

> For a list of supported databases, refer to [supported databases](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/#supported-databases).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a list of supported databases, refer to [supported databases](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation#supported-databases).
```

### Supported web browsers

> For a list of support web browsers, refer to [supported web browsers](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/#supported-web-browsers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a list of support web browsers, refer to [supported web browsers](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation#supported-web-browsers).
```

{{% admonition type="note" %}}

> Enable port `3000` in your network environment, as this is the Grafana default port.

Reviewer 2: Can you change this port?

Reviewer: @usmangt , do you know the answer to this question?

Author: So port 3000 is the default on non-containerized env. 

Here it is defined inside the grafana.yaml file. It is up to the user to change it to any other number. Its not hard coded

If Option 1 does not work in your minikube environment (this mostly depends on the network), then as an alternative you can use the port forwarding option for the Grafana service on port `3000`.

For more information about port forwarding, refer to [Use Port Forwarding to Access Applications in a Cluster](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/port-forward-access-application-cluster/).

1. To find the minikube IP address, run the following command:

   ```bash
   minikube ip
   ```

   The output contains the IP address that you use to access the Grafana Pod during port forwarding.

   A Pod is the smallest deployment unit in Kubernetes and is the core building block for running applications in a Kubernetes cluster. For more information about Pods, refer to [Pods](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/).

1. To obtain the Grafana Pod information, run the following command:

   ```bash
   kubectl get pods --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

   The output should look similar to the following:

   ```bash
   NAME                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   grafana-58445b6986-dxrrw   1/1     Running   0          9m54s
   ```

>    The output shows the Grafana POD name in the NAME column, that you use for port forwarding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The output shows the Grafana POD name in the `NAME` column, that you use for port forwarding.
```

   ```bash
   kubectl get all --namespace=my-grafana -o wide
   ```

   You should see the newly deployed `grafana-oss-dev` image.

1. To verify it, access the Grafana UI in the browser using the provided IP:Port from the command above.

   The Grafana sign-in page appears.

1. To sign in to Grafana, enter `admin` for both the username and password.
1. In the top-right corner, click the help icon.

   The version information appears.

1. Add the `change cause` metadata to keep track of things using the commands:

   ```bash
   kubectl annotate deployment grafana --namespace=my-grafana kubernetes.io/change-cause='using grafana-oss-dev:10.1.0-124419pre for testing'
   ```

1. To verify, run the `kubectl rollout history` command:

   ```bash
   kubectl rollout history deployment grafana --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

   You will see an output similar to this:

   ```bash
   deployment.apps/grafana
   REVISION  CHANGE-CAUSE
   1         deploying the default yaml
   2         using grafana-oss-dev:10.1.0-124419pre for testing
   ```

This means that `REVISION#2` is the current version.

{{% admonition type="note" %}}

> The last line of the `kubectl rollout history deployment` command output is the one which is currnetly active and running on your Kubernetes enviorment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last line of the `kubectl rollout history deployment` command output is the one which is currnetly active and running on your Kubernetes environment.
```

> **Note:** The last line of the `kubectl rollout history deployment` command output is the one which is currnetly active and running on your Kubernetes enviorment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last line of the `kubectl rollout history deployment` command output is the one which is currnetly active and running on your Kubernetes enviorment.
```

   ```

If you need to go back to any other `REVISION`, just repeat the steps above and use the correct revision number in the `--to-revision` parameter.

## Troubleshooting

This section includes troubleshooting tips you might find helpful when deploying Grafana on Kubernetes.

### Collecting logs

It is important to view the Grafana server logs while troubleshooting any issues.

1. To check the Grafana logs, run the following command:

   ```bash
   # dump Pod logs for a Deployment (single-container case)
   kubectl logs --namespace=my-grafana deploy/grafana
   ```

1. If you have multiple containers running in the deployment, run the following command to obtain the logs only for the Grafana deployment:

   ```bash
   # dump Pod logs for a Deployment (multi-container case)
   kubectl logs --namespace=my-grafana deploy/grafana -c grafana
   ```

For more information about accessing Kubernetes application logs, refer to [Pods](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#interacting-with-running-pods) and [Deployments](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#interacting-with-deployments-and-services).

### Increasing log levels to debug mode

> By default, the Grafana log level is set to `info`, but you can increase it to `debug` mode to fetch information needed to diagnose and troubleshoot a problem. For more information about Grafana log levels, refer to [Configuring logs](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#log).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the Grafana log level is set to `info`, but you can increase it to `debug` mode to fetch information needed to diagnose and troubleshoot a problem. For more information about Grafana log levels, refer to [Configuring logs](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana#log).
```

> By default, the Grafana log level is set to `info`, but you can increase it to `debug` mode to fetch information needed to diagnose and troubleshoot a problem. For more information about Grafana log levels, refer to [Configuring logs](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#log).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the Grafana log level is set to `info`, but you can increase it to `debug` mode to fetch information needed to diagnose and troubleshoot a problem. For more information about Grafana log levels, refer to [Configuring logs](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#log).
```

The following example uses the Kubernetes ConfigMap which is an API object that stores non-confidential data in key-value pairs. For more information, refer to [Kubernetes ConfigMap Concept](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/configmap/).

1. Create a empty file and name it `grafana.ini` and add the following:

   ```bash
   [log]
   ; # Either "debug", "info", "warn", "error", "critical", default is "info"
   ; # we change from info to debug level
   level = debug
   ```

>    This example adds the portion of the log section from the configuration file. You can refer to the [Configure Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/) documentation to view all the default configuration settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This example adds the portion of the log section from the configuration file. You can refer to the [Configure Grafana](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/) documentation to view all the default configuration settings.
```

             name: ge-config
   ```

1. Deploy the manifest using the following kubectl apply command:

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f grafana.yaml --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

1. To verify the status, run the following commands:

   ```bash
   # first check the rollout status
   kubectl rollout status deployment grafana --namespace=my-grafana

   # then check the deployment and configMap information
   kubectl get all --namespace=my-grafana
   ```

1. To verify it, access the Grafana UI in the browser using the provided IP:Port

   The Grafana sign-in page appears.

1. To sign in to Grafana, enter `admin` for both the username and password.

1. Navigate to **Server Admin > Settings** and then search for log.

   You should see the level to debug mode.

### Using the --dry-run command

You can use the Kubernetes `--dry-run` command to send requests to modifying endpoints and determine if the request would have succeeded.

Performing a dry run can be useful for catching errors or unintended consequences before they occur. For more information, refer to [Kubernetes Dry-run](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/576-dry-run/README.md).

> Example:

Reviewer 2: Should this be a heading? (H4 maybe?) or a sentence explaining the example?

Author: @chri2547 can you please suggest here?

Reviewer: @usmangt , we could add a sentence here that says something like "The following example shows..." - and then I need you to fill in what the example shows.

Author: @chri2547 just pushed the changes. please check
